Corresponding Author: kyongsik.yun@jpl.nasa.gov 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 
 
 
 
DEEP NEURAL NETWORKS FOR  
PATTERN RECOGNITION 
 
 
Kyongsik Yun, PhD, Alexander Huyen and  
Thomas Lu, PhD 
Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology, 
Pasadena, CA, US 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
In the field of pattern recognition research, the method of using deep 
neural networks based on improved computing hardware recently 
attracted attention because of their superior accuracy compared to 
conventional methods. Deep neural networks simulate the human visual 
system and achieve human equivalent accuracy in image classification, 
object detection, and segmentation. This chapter introduces the basic 
structure of deep neural networks that simulate human neural networks. 
Then we identify the operational  processes and applications of 
conditional generative adversarial networks, which are being actively 
researched based on the bottom-up and top-down mechanisms, the most 
important functions of the human visual perception process. Finally, 
Kyongsik Yun, Alexander Huyen and Thomas Lu 2 
recent developments in training strategies for effective learning of 
complex deep neural networks are addressed.  
 
1. PATTERN RECOGNITION IN HUMAN VISION 
 
In 1959, Hubel and Wiesel inserted microelectrodes into the primary 
visual cortex of an anesthetized cat [1]. They project bright and dark 
patterns on the screen in front of the cat. They found that cells in the visual 
cortex were driven by a “feature detector” that won the Nobel Prize. 
For example, when we recognize a human face, each cell in the 
primary visual cortex (V1 and V2) handles the simplest features such as 
lines, curves, and points. The higher-level visual cortex through the ventral 
object recognition path (V4) handles target components such as eyes, 
eyebrows and noses. Posterior inferior temporal cortex (pITC) then 
integrates more complex visual features (faces) with the context (name). 
Anterior inferior temporal cortex (aITC) more closely matches its name to 
a particular context (whether this person is female or male, living in 
California, etc.) [2]. 
 
 
Figure 1. Object recognition in human visual system. 
Human visual perception has hierarchical structure as described above 
and massively parallel processing capability based on thousands of 
synaptic connections in each neuron. Furthermore, human neural networks 

Deep Neural Networks for Pattern Recognition 3 
feature a winner-take-all framework which selects the most relevant 
neurons along the spatial dimensions in each layer. These three features 
(hierarchical structure, parallel processing, winner-take-all framework) 
inspired to build artificial neural networks, recently further evolved into 
deep convolutional neural networks. Winner-take-all framework especially 
adapted to build essential components of deep convolutional networks as 
max pooling and rectified linear unit (ReLU).  
 
 
2. HUMAN VISION-INSPIRED CONDITIONAL GENERATIVE 
ADVERSARIAL NETWORKS 
 
Human vision’s object recognition can be thought as bottom -up 
process, which integrates the lower level visual information to make sense 
out of it [3]. This process can occur in a completely opposite way, top-
down process, which is to visualize a new object based on semantic 
information (imagination). A special type of deep convolutional neural 
networks, conditional generative adversarial networks can be thought of as 
an implementation of a human brain process that combines a bottom-up 
recognition (discriminator network) and a top-down imagination (generator 
network). 
Generative adversarial networks learn the loss of classifying whether 
the generated output is real or not, while at the same time the networks 
learn the generative model to minimize this loss [4]. The conditional 
adversarial networks learn the mapping function from the input to the 
output as well as learning the loss function to train the mapping [5, 6].  
To train the generative adversarial networks, the objective is to solve 
the min-max game, finding the minimum over θg, or the parameters of our 
generator network G and maximum over θd, or the parameters of our 
discriminator network D.  
 
 (1) 

Kyongsik Yun, Alexander Huyen and Thomas Lu 4 
 
The first term in the objective function (1) is the likelihood, or 
expectation, of the real data being real from the data distribution Pdata. The 
log D(y) is the discriminator output for real data y. If y is real, D(y) is 1 and 
log D(y) is 0, which becomes the maximum. The second term is the 
expectation of z drawn from P(z), meaning the random data input for our 
generator network (Figure 1). D(G(z)) is the output of our discriminator for 
generated fake data G(z). If G(z) is close to real, D(G(z)) is close to 1, and 
the log (1-D(G(z))) becomes very small (minimized).  
 
   (2) 
 
(3) 
 
z is the random input variable to the generator network. An image can 
be used as input to the generator network instead of z. In the objective 
function (2), x, the real input is a conditional term for the generator. A 
conditional term x is then added to the discriminator network, as in 
function (3). The conditional adversarial networks learn the mapping from 
the input to the output and learn the loss function. 
 
 
3. PRECISION MULTI-BAND INFRARED IMAGE 
SEGMENTATION USING CONDITIONAL GENERATIVE 
ADVERSARIAL NETWORKS 
 
Generative adversarial networks have been applied to the task of 
segmenting between foreground and background classes in infrared 
images. One of the key differences between infrared and normal color 
images is the loss of two channels, with only a single component channel 
representing the pixel intensity for infrared images. This loss of 

Deep Neural Networks for Pattern Recognition 5 
information results in an increased difficulty of extracting meaningful 
features during both the training and inference phases. An example is the 
dynamic characteristics of the foreground and background intensities, 
which can change based on the amount of infrared radiation captured by 
the thermal imager. Factors such as sunlight intensity, reflected light and 
the composition of an object’s material contributes to inconsistent features. 
The intensity of the object and backgrounds in the images vary between 
frames and wavelengths, which add to the difficulty in achieving a precise 
segmentation between foreground and background. High noise 
backgrounds with similar pixel intensit ies to the object results in 
ambiguous boundaries that can prove to be difficult for manual 
segmentation techniques. Low contrast and low intensity features of the 
objects in these infrared wavelengths also contribute to this difficulty in 
accurate classification. Small features are areas where precise segmentation 
is required for accurate pixel classifications, especially in noisy 
background environments. The nature of generative adversarial networks 
which feature a generator and discriminator have proven to be a good fit in 
addressing the difficulties of infrared image segmentation. The relationship 
of these structures allows generative adversarial networks to capture more 
relevant features as compared to other network models. 
Digital image processing, filtering and thresholding have been used in 
image segmentation [7, 8]. However, the segmentation accuracy of these 
methods suffers when applied to images with non-uniform backgrounds. 
Shallow neural networks have also been used to perform adaptive 
thresholding [9–11]. A simple neural network with a few hidden layers 
would still have difficulty processing complex foreground and 
backgrounds. Traditional neural networks contain one to three hidden 
layers, whereas deep learning models can contain as many as 100 hidden 
layers. Typically, DNN models learn classification tasks from large labeled 
datasets of images, texts, or audio through a process called feature 
extraction. The multi-layered nature of a DNN allows for each layer to 
encode distinctive features. When classifying features in an image, some 
layers can extract edge features while others can extract texture. As the 
Kyongsik Yun, Alexander Huyen and Thomas Lu 6 
layers advance towards the output layer, encoded features become more 
complex. 
One of the drawbacks of DNNs is the requirement of a large number of 
training samples. It is time consuming to prepare training samples and 
ground truth data. Sometimes it is impossible to obtain many training 
samples. The DNN model discussed here makes use of conditional 
generative adversarial networks that learns a mapping from an input image 
to an output image [12]. By the nature of generative adversarial networks, 
the model generates a loss function directly from the training data. 
Conditional generative adversarial networks are conditioned to learn 
mappings from a dataset of paired images, a real image and its ground 
truth, which is the precise segmentation boundary of the object. The model 
is conditioned to take an infrared image of an object as an input and 
produce a binary mask of the object as an output. Using the feedback from 
the discriminator, the generator is able to produce images that resemble the 
desired ground truths from the input image. 
 
 
Figure 2. Conditional generative adversarial networks for object segmentation. (A) the 
U-Net generator to produce output images based on input images maintaining 
structural similarity between the input and output images by using skip connections; 
(B) the discriminator to determine whether the generator output is real or fake. 
 
 
Figure 2 shows the network architecture of the U -Net [12], an 
encoder/decoder network with skip connections  (Figure A) and the 

Deep Neural Networks for Pattern Recognition 7 
discriminator (Figure B). The generator architecture consists of a nine-
layer encoder and nine-layer decoder with skip connections between each 
encoder and decoder layer. An additional layer was added to both the 
encoder and decoder to increase the resolution from 256x256 to 512x512. 
As a result, a skip connection was added between the first encoder layer 
and the eighth decoder layer. 
An input image is resized into a 512x512 matrix to match the size of 
the input layer. The input image comes in the first layer in the top left. The 
data flows through the network and the segmented map comes out of the 
top right side of the generator. In each encoder layer, the network performs 
a 4x4 convolution, batch normalization, and an activation function (leaky 
rectified linear unit (LeakyReLU)). The network performs a 4x4 
deconvolution, batch normalization, and an activation function (rectified 
linear unit (ReLU)) for each decoder layer. 
Artificial training images are used to enhance the segmentation 
accuracy of misclassified features of certain objects. The target is removed 
and the surrounding area’s texture is taken to fill in the missing tar get 
creating an image with only the desired feature. After removing the object, 
the cropped feature is overlaid on top of the background image. 
Enhancement images are designed to increase the loss contribution of 
specific object features during the model’s retraining. By increasing the 
number of training images containing these emphasized loss contributions, 
the desired features are enhanced in the DNN. 
 
 
Figure 3. Example of an Augmented FF Dataset, (A) Original image, (b) GT, and an 
example of an Augmented feature cropped Dataset: (c) missing rotor part, (d) GT of 
the missing rotor. 

Kyongsik Yun, Alexander Huyen and Thomas Lu 8 
 
Figure 4. Retraining a DNN to enhance features: (a) the original image; (b) initial 
DNN output missing the right side of rotor blade; (c) the retrained DNN output 
showing the missing rotor blade part is reconstructed.  
GraphCut is a semi-manual segmentation technique which divides the 
entire frame into regions and weighs each based on the similarity to nearby 
regions. Edges where the weights are low are separated into foreground 
and background. A manual selection of samples in the foreground and 
background are needed by GraphCut to distinguish the class of its regions. 
More manual sample selections can be added to further r efine the 
segmentation, but if the similarity between some regions of the frame is 
high, no matter how many manual sample selections are increased, false 
classification will occur. 
Binary segmentation masks can be created by applying an 
automatically generated threshold. Iterative inter-means or IsoData [8] was 
used for the automatic threshold to perform the segmentation. This 
algorithm separates foreground and background with a starting threshold, 
which is then updated by calculating an average of two aver ages from 
values of the pixels above and below the initial threshold. The initial 
threshold is updated until it is higher than the average of two averages 
from pixels higher and lower than it. ImageJ [13] was used to perform 
segmentation by manually thresholding the image. The threshold value was 
selected based on the accuracy of segmented features and amount of noise 
generated. A higher threshold tends to remove a majority of noise in the 
segmentation but misses low intensity features like the antennae and rotor 
blades. 

Deep Neural Networks for Pattern Recognition 9 
A small scale neural network was used to perform infrared image 
segmentations [10]. This neural network consisted of one input layer, one 
hidden layer and one output layer. The hidden layer of this simple neural 
network contained only 25 neurons. The simple neural network gives 
decent segmentation results (9.2% XOR error) compared to the previous 
GraphCut (19.0% XOR error) and thresholding methods (10.3% XOR 
error). A drawback of this small scale neural network is the lack of 
generalization across intensity changes in the foreground and background. 
DeepLab v2 (ResNet-101) [14] is an implementation of deep 
convolutional networks for the purpose of semantic segmentation. The 
specific implementation used here features atrous convolution and atrous 
spatial pyramid pooling, without the application of conditional random 
fields for post processing. Atrous convolution refers to retrieving full 
resolution features by using upsampled filters in the convolutional layers. 
Atrous spatial pyramid pooling (ASPP) is used during the feature 
abstraction stages to increase resilience against shifts in scale by utilizing 
multiple filters with various sampling rates [14]. Figure 5 showed the 
results of the segmentation by Deeplab in Figure 5 and the modified 
conditional generative adversarial networks (JPL’s segmentation) in Figure 
5. Deeplab was capable of identifying the object and separating the object 
from background. However, the Deeplab model was not able to draw an 
accurate boundary of the object, missing small details of the object. 
 
 
Figure 5. Segmentation results: (A) Original image; (B) Deeplab ResNet segmentation 
output; (C) JPL segmentation output using conditional generative adversarial networks. 

Kyongsik Yun, Alexander Huyen and Thomas Lu 10 
 
Figure 6. Comparison of the segmentation results of Graphcut, Deeplab-ResNet, 
manual thresholding, simple neural network and JPL network (modified conditional 
generative adversarial networks). 
The modified conditional generative adversarial networks model has 
shown to be able to generate significantly more accurate segmentation 
masks than the thresholding methods, GraphCut, DeepLab v2 model, and 
the simple neural network model. Although the simple neural network 
achieved an average XOR percentage of 9.2% with less than a minute of 
training, manual input is required. Manual selection of coordinates to 
create a bounding box around the object is needed for both training and 
inference. The simple neural network also has difficulty with segmenting 
fine features around the low intensity regions. 
The conditional generative adversarial network s architecture has 
demonstrated the ability to precisely segment objects from a noisy 
background in infrared wavelength images. Low intensity features and 
gradient edges are clearly extracted by the model where m ethods like 
iterative inter-means thresholding, manual thresholding, and GraphCut 
generally fail. The DNN can be trained by a relatively small number of 
training images due to the conditional generative adversarial networks 
architecture. It demonstrated robust object detection, identification and 
precision segmentation in highly cluttered backgrounds. Other DNN 
architectures focused on semantic segmentation are able to generate 

Deep Neural Networks for Pattern Recognition 11 
segmentation masks better than thresholding methods but often miss major 
features of the object. 
 
 
4. OCCLUDED OBJECT RECONSTRUCTION USING 
CONDITIONAL GENERATIVE ADVERSARIAL NETWORKS  
 
Conditional generative adversarial networks can be used to reconstruct 
partially occluded objects [15]. Occluded object reconstruction can be 
useful to provide situational awareness information especially to next -
generation first responders to help them perform safe, healthy, and 
successful missions. More than 30,000 firefighters are injured each year 
during firefighting operations [16, 17]. Slips, trips, and falls cause a large 
number of firefighter injuries, reinforcing the need for advanced ground 
support for firefighters [18, 19]. 
Occluded object reconstruction can provide the “see-through” feature 
in augmented reality glasses [20]. If firefighters can see through the fire, it 
will help them to navigate the incident more safely and efficiently. 
Moreover, firefighters can quickly find victims partia lly occluded by 
objects. Estimating the size and shape of a fire in a partially occluded 
situation is particularly important in that it can predict a sudden fire 
explosion (flashover phenomenon) [21]. If firefighters are provided with 
see-through capability, they can be safe from dangerous environments and 
fully understand the surrounding situation. 
In this study, the authors used generative adversarial networks to train 
associations between various images of flammable and hazardous objects 
and their partially occluded counterparts. Figure 7 show the overall 
architecture, including input occluded images, generated output 
reconstruction images, and ground truth images. While the original 
generative adversarial networks generate real-looking images from the 
random noise input z, the conditional generative adversarial networks can 
find the association of the two images (i.e., original and occluded), and 
transform or reconstruct the real input image into another image.  
Kyongsik Yun, Alexander Huyen and Thomas Lu 12 
 
Figure 7. Conditional generative adversarial networks architecture. The generator 
network uses the occluded real image as input to output a reconstructed fake image. 
The generated image is compared with the real image in the discriminator network that 
outputs the classification of the real or the fake. With adversarial training, the 
generator produces a more realistic image, and the discriminator more accurately 
distinguishes between real and fake. 
The goal was to reconstruct partially occluded objects in the image, so 
it can be helpful to train the basic structure of the actual objects (fire, gas 
tank, roof, etc.) and to maintain the structural similarity of the input and 
output images. Therefore, the authors used U-Net architecture [22] for our 
generator based on an encoder -decoder network that was gradually 
downsampled and upsampled for efficiency. The network then applied the 
skip layer. That is, each downsampling layer is sent to and connected to the 
corresponding upsampling layer. Finally, the upsampling layer could 
directly learn important structural features from the downsampling layer. 
The authors collected 100 images from Google Images (keywords: gas 
tank fire) (Figure 8). They then added artificial occlusion to the image and 
used it as input. We used 80 image pairs randomly selected for training and 
20 image pairs for testing. 
 
 
 

Deep Neural Networks for Pattern Recognition 13 
 
Figure 8. Representative training image pairs for our conditional generative adversarial 
networks. Propane gas tank images in various situations were used for training. The 
original image was entered into the discriminator network and the occluded copy was 
used as the generator network input.  
 
Figure 9. Reconstructing a partially occluded object for first respo nders using 
conditional generative adversarial networks and augmented reality glasses. The 
reconstructed image was overlaid on the input image and used as a visual enhancement 
feature for the first responder.  
After training conditional generative adversarial networks, the system 
reconstructed test images of partially occluded flammable objects. Finally, 
the reconstructed image was superimposed on the input image to provide 
“transparency” (Figure 9). Representative reconstructions are shown in 

Kyongsik Yun, Alexander Huyen and Thomas Lu 14 
Figure 10. Five out of 20 test images were incorrectly reconstructed as 
shown in Figure 10C (25% error rate). 
Conditional generative adversarial networks have shown good results 
on small data sets (fewer than 100 samples) [5, 15, 21]. The advantage of a 
small datasets is the speed of training. The findings of the study were based 
on less than five hours of training on a single NVIDIA GTX1080 GPU. 
Because the time it takes to convert the test output image is shorter than 
200 milliseconds, this study can be applied as a real solution that 
incorporates improved insight into the augmented reality glasses of the 
next generation first responder. 
Previous studies have attempted to reconstruct an occluded object in 
augmented reality by solving mathematical models [20, 23]. Using deep 
learning-based conditional generative adversarial networks, we could 
reconstruct complex backgrounds and multiple objects more easily than 
mathematical models. Deep learning can be thought of as a nonlinear 
numerical model. Mathematical models may not be accurate in a complex 
real world. 
If the objective is to provide a warning and help identify the victim in a 
fire situation, one may argue that we can provide the necessary specific 
information directly, without having to reconstruct the partially occluded 
object as in this study. It may be true, but by providing a reconstruction of 
the occluded object, first responders can discover other significant risks 
that cannot be identified by a warning algorithm. Moreover, in terms of 
explanatory and transparent solutions, lower level perceptual information 
(visualization of occluded parts) is more intuitive and faster than warning 
signals [24– 26].  
 
 
 
 
Deep Neural Networks for Pattern Recognition 15 
 
Figure 10. Representative correct and incorrect reconstruction examples. (A) The fire 
pattern was not generated correctly. (B) The fire pattern was accurately generated. The 
transmission tower located in the background behind the fire was not reconstructed. 
(C) A false fire pattern was created (negative example). The roof was generated 
correctly.  
The reason for not reconstructing the objects correctly in some test 
images (Figure 4C) may be due to a lack of variability in the training data 
set. As the next step, the number and variability of training images should 
be increased to deal with various types of gas tanks and fire events. 
Contextual information, including building s tructure, fire cause, and 
gas/chemical sensor information, will help provide more accurate semantic 
reconstruction. Image changes over time and perspective changes can also 
be added to increase accuracy. 
 
 
5. IMAGE ENHANCEMENT FROM VISUAL TO  
INFRARED USING CONDITIONAL GENERATIVE 
ADVERSARIAL NETWORKS 
 
Conditional generative adversarial networks can be used to enhance 
images. Deep learning based image enhancement can be applied to provide 

Kyongsik Yun, Alexander Huyen and Thomas Lu 16 
contextual insights for firefighters to predict flashover phenomena [27–29]. 
Flashover is an example of a fire that spreads very quickly across a gap 
because of the intense heat. Flashover is the most frightening phenomenon 
among firefighters. In particular, firefighters need years of training and 
experience to identify, predict, and plan how to engage flashovers [30, 31]. 
Previous studies constructed mathematical models of flashover based 
on variables, including fuel, temperature, and ventilation [32–34]. A 
previous study applied a numerical model using oxygen concentration and 
mean flame surface size to predict flashover time, and the authors 
predicted flashover within 70 seconds before it occurred [35]. Another 
study developed a method to estimate the temperature of a fire before 
flashover [36]. However, these computational models of flashover fire 
require structural information of the area and temperature/oxygen data 
using special sensors that are not practical for real fire mission 
applications. 
The index of flashovers includes dark smoke, high heat and rollover 
(angel fingers) and can be quantified by color, size and shape. Firefighters 
use hand-held thermal imaging cameras to detect and analyze the quality of 
fire in dark situations [37]. Hand-held cameras require one hand for 
location and operation, leaving only one hand for other tasks. Due to the 
lack of a properly used thermal imaging camera, it has contributed to the 
injury and death of a firefighter [18, 38]. Moreover, due to the budget 
constraints of the fire department, the infrared camera system is not 
currently available for all firefighters [39].  
To solve this problem, we used a standard body camera and analyzed 
the color video stream. We applied generative adversarial neural networks 
[4] to enhance very dark fire and smoke patterns. We then monitored the 
dynamic changes of smoke and fire. Finally, we provided information on 
when flashover could occur. 
The basic idea comes from the fact that experienced firefighters can 
identify fire and smoke quality visually even in very dark conditions [40–
42]. They can imagine a thermal image through a regular color image. So 
we applied image-to-image conversion techniques using conditional 
adversarial networks [5] that have been shown to be effective in 
Deep Neural Networks for Pattern Recognition 17 
synthesizing photos from label maps, reconstructing objects from edge 
maps, and colorizing images.  
Conditional adversarial network training requires a thermal image 
(input) that matches a regular color image (output). The network maps the 
input image to the output image. Flashover training videos were provided 
by Lewisville Fire Department and Texas State Fire Marshal ’s Office. 
These videos show the fire generation and evolution through flashover at 
an early stage using the burn pod made by the department. The video 
includes both a regular video camera and a thermal camera view that can 
be seen by firefighters. A total of 40 frames of regular and thermal image 
pairs were used in this preliminary study (30 images for training, 1 0 
images for the test). 
The authors calculated the number of pixels in the red, green, and blue 
channels. The yellow channel is defined as the average of the red and green 
channels. Red is 300-500°F, yellow is 200-300°F, green is 100-200°F, and 
blue is 0-100°F depending on the temperature representation of the infrared 
camera. This drew the time variation of the number of pixels in each 
channel. 
In the test of the generative network, ten images were used as inputs 
from the beginning of the fire to the flashover transition (0-200 seconds). 
The output image was then created (Figure 11). During the early stages of 
the fire, the general structure of the objects (tables and sofas) and mild 
smoke were identified (Figure 11A). Even in very dark environments, the 
network successfully generated hot smoke from the input image (Figure 
11B). In a flashover situation, a high heat was calculated and the table 
object was still identified (Figure 11C). 
The output images were further analyzed by counting pixels of each 
thermal component (red, yellow, green, blue) and then their temporal 
changes were plotted (Figure 12). Based on the temporal changes of high 
temperature components (300-500°F and 200-300°F), the authors predicted 
a flashover as early as 55 seconds before it occurred.  
 
 
 
Kyongsik Yun, Alexander Huyen and Thomas Lu 18 
 
Figure 11. Representative images of transformation from the visual to the thermal 
images using generative adversarial networks. 
 
Figure 12. Size of smoke and flame over time. Based on the rate of changes in smoke 
and flame size, flashover fire was predicted as early as 55 seconds before it occurred. 

Deep Neural Networks for Pattern Recognition 19 
In this study, the authors showed that regular body camera images can 
be transformed and enhanced to represent thermal information, and this 
technique can be used to predict flashover 55 seconds before it occurs. In 
order to fully understand the process of image enhancement from the 
regular visual image to the thermal image, we visualized the transformed 
intermediate results in each latent space of the networks (Figure 13). In the 
early part of the space, representative features (i.e., fire and smoke) were 
improved. In the deeper part of the space, fire and smoke were further 
subdivided by the estimated temperature. Then representative objects (i.e., 
tables and sofas) were detected. As a result, thermal information and 
representative objects of fire and smoke were reconstructed in the final 
output image. Visualization of the hidden layers of neural networks is 
particularly useful for understanding the internal dynamics of the whole 
process, which has often been considered a black box [43, 44].  
A previous study presented a thermal camera system integrated into a 
firefighter helmet equipped with an OLED display [45]. The authors’ 
proposed algorithm can al so be applied to predict flashover by 
automatically analyzing thermal images and quantifying the time changes 
of thermal content of smoke and fire. As for information overload, a high 
level of information (i.e., flashover timing prediction) can be provided to 
firefighters without overlaying the heat/occluded information on the 
display. This is best not to disturb the firefighter’s view, but still provides 
the most important information. 
 
 
Figure 13. Representative latent-space visualizations of the generative adversarial 
networks for image enhancement. 

Kyongsik Yun, Alexander Huyen and Thomas Lu 20 
6. DATA AUGMENTATION FOR TRAINING DEEP  
NEURAL NETWORKS 
 
One of the major challenges in deep learning is retrieving sufficiently 
large labeled training datasets, which can become expensive and time 
consuming to collect. A unique approach to training segmentation is to use 
Deep Neural Network (DNN) models with a minimal amount of initial 
labeled training samples. The procedure involves creating synthetic data 
and using image registration to calculate affine transformations to apply to 
the synthetic data. The method takes a small dataset and generates a high-
quality augmented reality synthetic dataset with strong variance while 
maintaining consistency with real cases. Results illustrate segmentation 
improvements in various target features and increased average target 
confidence. The motivation for synthetic data is due to lack of available 
labeled data, which is recommended in large volumes for supervised deep 
learning. Particularly for resource limited research groups, data is difficult 
to collect due to monetary and time expenses. Furthermore, deep learning 
is susceptible to poor training efficiency, and fully training a deep neural 
network requires a significant amount of time especially if computing 
resources are limited [46]. The rate of progress in this field can be 
improved by making further progress in data accessibility and training 
optimization. 
 
 
Figure 14. Example of an augmented reality synthetic video sequence created through 
successive transformations and superimposing the resulting images onto a sequence of 
background frames. 
 
 

Deep Neural Networks for Pattern Recognition 21 
Data augmentation is a method for increasing the size of a dataset and 
the approach has demonstrated performance benefits in deep learning even 
with synthetic data [47]. Data augmentation has been proven to improve 
image segmentation models and this is especially beneficial when working 
with small training datasets [48, 49]. A dataset can be augmented using a 
variety of processing tools, mainly by adding noise to an image, 
performing geometric transformations, or adjusting the original colors and 
contrast. As a result, the augmented dataset artificially introduces new 
information that can improve generalization of the network and prevent 
overfitting. In situations where training data is expensive to obtain and 
manually label, synthetic data can provide valuable additional training sets. 
For segmentation tasks, synthetic targets are created from a template and 
multiplied through the application of transformations. The resulting 
synthetic training targets can be easily binarized through a global threshold 
to create their corresponding labeled masks. This process is both efficient 
and inexpensive in generating training samples and their labels. The 
quality and size of the dataset are arguably just as important as the 
optimization of network parameters [50]. 
External videos that contain an object demonstrating a desired motion 
were used as a reference to retrieve the transformation matrices to apply to 
the synthetic data. These videos do not necessarily have to be of the same 
style representing the model; only the dynamic properties of the object 
need to be representative. Once the synthetic data has been transformed, 
the sequence of frames can be super imposed onto a sequence of 
background images as shown in Figure 15. 
 
 
Figure 15. Augmentation process: (a) Preprocessed background frame, (b) Synthetic 
target frame, (c) Superposition of Target and background frames. 

Kyongsik Yun, Alexander Huyen and Thomas Lu 22 
 
Figure 16. Example of progression of segmentations as more images are included: (a) 
Result from initial training set (10 image training set), (b) Result from second 
retraining iteration (50 image training set), (c) Result from fourth retraining iteration 
(90 image training set). 
 
Table 1. Synthetic data training average test accuracy results on the 
116-image test set and the 154-image test set 
 
Number of synthetic 
training images 
10 30 50 70 90 110 
Segmentation test 
accuracy 
89.30% 90.86% 90.84% 91.17% 91.99% 92.21% 
 
Figure 16 shows the progression of improved accuracy as the synthetic 
training samples are added to the training set. Consistent improvements are 
expected as images are added. More training images are added to the 
training data set based on the previous training’s performance, but it is 
difficult to verify whether the new images will be beneficial to the specific 
problem set without testing after propagating them through the CNN. 
The training set includes an initial set of synthetic target frames. This 
set of data is transformed using the proposed method to augment the 
training dataset. Table 1 shows the results of test accuracy vs number of 
synthetic images added to the training set. The DNN performs better when 
more augmented synthetic images are used to train the DNN.  
AR is a useful method for creating data for DNN training as it can 
automatically guide data augmentation by tracing the real-world dynamics 
of an object in a reference video. State-of-art AR has also allowed for a 
variety of applications in simulation, education and medical [51]. The 
results from training a DNN using AR for dataset augmentation has 

Deep Neural Networks for Pattern Recognition 23 
demonstrated effectiveness in precision segmentation of infrared images. 
As more images were added to the datasets, network performance 
increased and further supports the concept of using data augmentation to 
improve the quality of training datasets. For single class, low-resolution 
infrared images, our AR approach score achieved an accuracy of 92.21% 
when using synthetic targets and 92.78% when using real targets. The 110 
image synthetic training dataset performed within 1% similar accuracy as 
the 110 image real dataset, which also validates the effectiveness in 
training a DNN with synthetic data. The results of this suggest that AR can 
be applied as a convenient tool for training a DNN for precision infrared 
image segmentation.  
 
 
7. INCREMENTAL TRAINING 
 
Incremental training provides a practical solution for deep neura l 
networks where training from scratch is time consuming and resource 
intensive. Convolutional neural networks (CNN) have proven to be able to 
produce world class results in multiple domains such as computer vision, 
natural language processing, and speech recognition. CNNs leverage large 
amounts of training data to expand its ability to generalize and adapt to its 
current problem set. Compared to previous architectures that required 
many experts to hand-engineer features, CNNs can process raw data and 
generate relevant features autonomously. These features are automatically 
extracted from the training data by the CNN, with only the architecture of 
the neural network being pre-defined. Despite the effectiveness of these 
neural networks in adapting to new problems, some drawbacks are present. 
Deep neural networks are computationally demanding, take large amounts 
of training data and requires lots of power and time to fully train. Hyper 
parameters such as learning rates, exponential decay rates, and loss 
function types are difficult to select and calibrate. Hardware limitations 
forces training data sets to be split into batches instead of propagating 
through the network all at once. This lengthy process is unacceptable to 
repeat from scratch every time the network needs to be trained with new 
Kyongsik Yun, Alexander Huyen and Thomas Lu 24 
data. Incremental training can potentially maximize the accuracy of the 
CNN by addressing these issues. One application of incremental training 
can be applied to selectively fine-tune certain missed features without 
requiring training with the entire data set. Instead of adding in new data 
and relying on random batching to update the new features, incremental 
training can be used to focus on what was missed in previous batches. This 
method of incremental training is optimal during the fine-tuning stages of 
training with a relatively low amount of training samples, while the 
benefits of training from scratch increases as the number of training data 
remains relatively unchanged and exceptionally large. Various approaches 
utilizing incremental training for support vector machines and hidden 
Markov models are found in [52–55]. 
In an experiment with the results plotted in Figure 17 the conditional 
generative adversarial networks model was trained using an initial subset 
of 12 images from 68 ground truths. This initial training on the 12 images 
was trained in 1.73 hours to 1000 epochs. A second training session was 
done by adding 8 new images to the previously used 12-image set from the 
68-image set. The epoch with the lowest L1 validation score from the 12-
image training session was selected as the we ight matrix to begin 
retraining for the 20-image training. This 20-image training session was 
run for 1.96 hours to 1000 epochs. The same process was repeated for the 
final training, with 16 new images being added to the 20-image dataset. 
The lowest L1 validation scoring weight matrix from the 20-image set was 
used to continue training for this new 36-image set. This 36-image training 
was done for 2.9 hours to 1000 epochs. A final training was done for 
another 4.05 hours to 1000 epochs on top of the weight matrix from the 36-
image set with the lowest L1 validation score using the entire set of 68 
images. This process of increasing the training set in batches and retraining 
using a previous optimal weight matrix generated more accurate results 
than the regular method of training. In comparison, using the conventional 
method of training from scratch with the entire set of 68 images to 10,000 
epochs for 42.45 hours achieved an average XOR error percentage of 
4.98% compared to 10.64 hours of training for a total of 4000 epochs and a 
resulting average XOR error percentage of 4.23%. This experiment shows 
Deep Neural Networks for Pattern Recognition 25 
the effectiveness of incremental training with new training images, 
compared to training with an entire dataset with much longer running 
times.  
 
 
Figure 17. Performance (error) comparison of retraining process: Four-step retraining 
results (A, B, C, D) compared against single training results (E). The 4-step training 
achieved lower error rate in a quarter training time as compared to a single training 
session. The XOR error percentages for each training iteration was generated by 
calculating the average results from testing on an 11-image standard test dataset that 
was not included in the training dataset. 
 
CONCLUSION 
 
Deep convolutional neural networks, especially conditional generative 
adversarial networks tremendously improved the accuracy in image 
classification and enhancement, and object detection and segmentation. 
The system imitates human learning about the laws of physics through 
experience by learning the shape and characteristics of objects for precise 
segmentation and enhancement. As human learning, incremental learning 
is effective in training deep convolutional neural networks. This system 
will provide important support to enable humans to perform any task more 
accurately and efficiently. 
 

Kyongsik Yun, Alexander Huyen and Thomas Lu 26 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
 
The research was carried out at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, 
California Institute of Technology, under a contract with the National 
Aeronautics and Space Administration. The research was funded by the 
U.S. Department of Homeland Security Science and Technology 
Directorate Next Generation First Responders Apex Program (DHS S&T 
NGFR) under NASA prime contract NAS7-03001, Task Plan Number 82-
106095, and by the U.S. Department of Defense, Test Resource  
Management Center, Test & Evaluation/Science and Technology 
(T&E/S&T) Program under NASA prime contract NAS7-03001, Task Plan 
Number 81-12346.  
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] Hubel, D. H. and Wiesel, T. N. “Shape and arrangement of columns 
in cat’s striate cortex,” The Journal of physiology, vol. 165, no. 3, pp. 
559–568, 1963. 
[2] Vandenberghe, R., Price, C., Wise, R., Josephs, O., and Frackowiak, 
R. S. J. “Functional anatomy of a common semantic system for 
words and pictures,” Nature, vol. 383, no. 6597, p. 254, 1996. 
[3] Yun, K. and Stoica, A. “Improved target recognition response using 
collaborative brain-computer interfaces,” presented at the Systems, 
Man, and Cybernetics (SMC), 2016 IEEE International Conference 
on, 2016, pp. 002220–002223. 
[4] Goodfellow, I. et al., “Generative adversarial nets,” in Advances in 
neural information processing systems, 2014, pp. 2672–2680. 
[5] Isola, P., Zhu, J. Y., Zhou, T., and Efros, A. A. “Image-to-image 
translation with conditional adversarial networks,” arXiv preprint, 
2017. 
[6] Mirza, M. and Osindero, S. “Conditional generative adversarial 
nets,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1411.1784, 2014. 
Deep Neural Networks for Pattern Recognition 27 
[7] Boykov, Y., Veksler, O., and Zabih, R. “Fast approximate energy 
minimization via graph cuts,” IEEE Transactions on pattern analysis 
and machine intelligence, vol. 23, no. 11, pp. 1222–1239, 2001. 
[8] Ridler, T. W. and Calvard, S. “Picture thresholding using an iterative 
selection method,” IEEE trans syst Man Cybern, vol. 8, no. 8, pp. 
630–632, 1978. 
[9] Lu, T. et al., “Cross-correlation and image alignment for multi-band 
IR sensors,” in Optical Pattern Recognition XXVII, 2016, vol. 9845, 
p. 984505. 
[10] Lu, T. et al., “Intelligent multi-spectral IR image segmentation,” in 
Pattern Recognition and Tracking XXVIII, 2017, vol. 10203, p. 
1020303. 
[11] Lu, T. and Mintzer, D. “Hybrid neural networks for nonlinear pattern 
recognition,” Optical Pattern Recognition, pp. 40–63, 1998. 
[12] Isola, P., Zhu, J. Y., Zhou, T., and Efros, A. A. “Image-to-image 
translation with conditional adversarial networks,” arXiv preprint, 
2017. 
[13] Rasband, W. S. “ImageJ: Image processing and analysis in Java,” 
Astrophysics Source Code Library, 2012. 
[14] Chen, L. C., Papandreou, G., Kokkinos, I., Murphy, K., and Yuille, 
A. L. “Deeplab: Semantic image segmentation with deep 
convolutional nets, atrous convolution, and fully connected crfs,” 
IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence, vol. 
40, no. 4, pp. 834–848, 2018. 
[15] Yun, K., Lu, T., and Chow, E. “Occluded object reconstruction for 
first responders with augmented reality glasses using conditional 
generative adversarial networks,” in Pattern Recognition and 
Tracking XXIX, 2018, vol. 10649, p. 106490T. 
[16] Bowyer, M. E., Miles, V., Baldwin, T. N., and Hales, T. R. 
“Preventing deaths and injuries of fire fighters during training 
exercises,” 2016. 
[17] Butler, C., Marsh, S., Domitrovich, J. W., and Helmkamp, J. 
“Wildland firefighter deaths in the United States: A comparison of 
Kyongsik Yun, Alexander Huyen and Thomas Lu 28 
existing surveillance systems,” Journal of occupational and 
environmental hygiene, vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 258–270, 2017. 
[18] Karter, M. J. and Molis, J. L. US Firefighter Injuries-2012. National 
Fire Protection Association, Fire Analysis and Research Division, 
Quincy, MA. 2012. 
[19] Smith, D. L. Firefighter fatalities and injuries: the role of heat stress 
and PPE. Firefighter Life Safety Research Center, Illinois Fire 
Service Institute, University of Illinois, 2008. 
[20] Azuma, R., Baillot, Y., Behringer, R., Feiner, S., Julier, S., and 
MacIntyre, B. “Recent advances in augmented reality,” IEEE 
computer graphics and applications, vol. 21, no. 6, pp. 34–47, 2001. 
[21] Yun, K., Bustos, J. and Lu, T. “Predicting Rapid Fire Growth 
(Flashover) Using Conditional Generative Adversarial Networks,” 
Electronic Imaging, vol. 2018, no. 9, pp. 1–4, 2018. 
[22] Ronneberger, O., Fischer, P., and Brox, T. “U-net: Convolutional 
networks for biomedical image segmentation,” in International 
Conference on Medical image computing and computer -assisted 
intervention, 2015, pp. 234–241. 
[23] Lee, J., Hirota, G., and State, A. “Modeling real objects using video 
see-through augmented reality,” Presence: Teleoperators & Virtual 
Environments, vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 144–157, 2002. 
[24] Gunning, D. “Explainable artificial intelligence (xai),” Defense 
Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA), nd Web, 2017. 
[25] Pei, K., Cao, Y., Yang, J. and Jana, S. “Deepxplore: Automated 
whitebox testing of deep learning systems,” in Proceedings of the 
26th Symposium on Operating Systems Principles, 2017, pp. 1–18. 
[26] Samek, W., Wiegand, T., and Müller, K. R. “Explainable Artificial 
Intelligence: Understanding, Visualizing and Interpreting Deep 
Learning Models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.08296, 2017. 
[27] Ćalušić,	A. L. et al., “Biomarkers of mild hyperthermia related to 
flashover training in firefighters,” Journal of thermal biology, vol. 
37, no. 8, pp. 548–555, 2012. 
Deep Neural Networks for Pattern Recognition 29 
[28] Ljubičić, A., Varnai, V. M., Petrinec, B., and Macan, J. “Response to 
thermal and physical strain during flashover training in Croatian 
firefighters,” Applied ergonomics, vol. 45, no. 3, pp. 544–549, 2014. 
[29] Gorbett, G. E., Hopkins, R., and Kennedy, P. “The current 
knowledge & training regarding backdraft, flashover, and other rapid 
fire progression phenomena,” in annual meeting of the National Fire 
Protection Association, Boston, MA, 2007. 
[30] Ebersole, J. F., Furlong, T. J., and Ebersole Jr, J. F. “Augmented 
reality-based firefighter training system and method,” Dec-2002. 
[31] Buckman III, J. M. Chief fire officer’s desk reference. Jones & 
Bartlett Learning, 2005. 
[32] Lee, S., and Harada, K. “A Simplified Formula for Occurrence of 
Flashover and Corresponding Heat Release Rate,” Procedia 
Engineering, vol. 62, pp. 292–300, Jan. 2013. 
[33] Johansson, N. and Hees, P. “A correlation for predicting smoke layer 
temperature in a room adjacent to a room involved in a pre-flashover 
fire,” Fire and Materials, vol. 38, no. 2, pp. 182–193, 2014. 
[34] Andersson, L. “Thermal Exposure Caused by the Smoke Gas Layer 
in Pre-flashover Fires: A Two-zone Model Approach,” 2016. 
[35] Sung, K. H., Choi, M. S., Hong, S. H., Park, K. W., and Ryou, H. S., 
“Numerical Study on the Prediction Method of Flashover in a 
Compartment,” Journal of Korean Society of Hazard Mitigation, vol. 
15, no. 4, pp. 123–128, 2015. 
[36] Evegren, F., and Wickström, U. “New approach to estimate 
temperatures in pre-flashover fires: Lumped heat case,” Fire safety 
journal, vol. 72, pp. 77–86, 2015. 
[37] Kim, J. H. and Lattimer, B. Y. “Real-time probabilistic classification 
of fire and smoke using thermal imagery for intelligent firefighting 
robot,” Fire Safety Journal, vol. 72, pp. 40–49, 2015. 
[38] Kolomay, R. and Hoff, R. Firefighter rescue & survival. PennWell 
Books, 2003. 
[39] Amon, F. and Pearson, C. “Thermal imaging in firefighting and 
thermography applications,” Radiometric Temperature 
Measurements: II. Applications, vol. 43, pp. 279–331, 2009. 
Kyongsik Yun, Alexander Huyen and Thomas Lu 30 
[40] Quińones, M. A., Ford, J. K., and Teachout, M. S. “The relationship 
between work experience and job performance: A conceptual and 
meta-analytic review,” Personnel Psychology, vol. 48, no. 4, pp. 
887–910, 1995. 
[41] Liao, H., Arvey, R. D., Butler, R. J., and Nutting, S. M. “Correlates 
of work injury frequency and duration among firefighters.,” Journal 
of occupational health psychology, vol. 6, no. 3, p. 229, 2001. 
[42] Mondragon-Gilmore, J. Firefighters and the experience of increased 
intuitive awareness during emergency incidents. Pacifica Graduate 
Institute, 2014. 
[43] Tzeng, F. Y., and Ma, K. L. “Opening the black box-data driven 
visualization of neural networks,” in Visualization, 2005. VIS 05. 
IEEE, 2005, pp. 383–390. 
[44] Radford, A., Metz, L., and Chintala, S. “Unsupervised representation 
learning with deep convolutional generative adversarial networks,” 
arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.06434, 2015. 
[45] Sosnowski, T., Madura, H., Bieszczad, G., and Kastek, M. “Thermal 
camera system integrated into firefighter helmet,” Measurement 
Automation Monitoring, vol. 63, 2017. 
[46] Wu, R., Yan, S., Shan, Y., Dang, Q., and Sun, G. “Deep image: 
Scaling up image recognition,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1501.02876, 
2015. 
[47] Rajpura, P., Goyal, M., Hegde, R., and Bojinov, H. “Dataset 
Augmentation with Synthetic Images Improves Semantic 
Segmentation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1709.00849, 2017. 
[48] Taylor, L., and Nitschke, G. “Improving Deep Learning using 
Generic Data Augmentation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.06020, 
2017. 
[49] Xu, Y. et al., “Improved relation classification by deep recurrent 
neural networks with data augmentation,” arXiv preprint 
arXiv:1601.03651, 2016. 
[50] Sun, C., Shrivastava, A., Singh, S., and Gupta, A. “Revisiting 
unreasonable effectiveness of data in deep learning era,” in 2017 
Deep Neural Networks for Pattern Recognition 31 
IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2017, 
pp. 843–852. 
[51] Noh, Z., Sunar, M. S., and Pan, Z. “A review on augmented reality 
for virtual heritage system,” in International Conference on 
Technologies for E-Learning and Digital Entertainment, 2009, pp. 
50–61. 
[52] Zhang, J., Li, Z., and Yang, J. “A divisional incremental training 
algorithm of support vector machine,” in Mechatronics and 
Automation, 2005 IEEE International Conference, 2005, vol. 2, pp. 
853–856. 
[53] Goto, Y., Hochberg, M. M., Mashao, D. J., and Silverman, H. F., 
“Incremental MAP estimation of HMMs for efficient training and 
improved performance,” in Acoustics, Speech, and Signal 
Processing, 1995. ICASSP-95., 1995 International Conference on, 
1995, vol. 1, pp. 457–460. 
[54] Shilton, A., Palaniswami, M., Ralph, D., and Tsoi, A. C. 
“Incremental training of support vector machines,” IEEE 
transactions on neural networks, vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 114–131, 2005. 
[55] Xiao, R., Wang, J., and Zhang, F. “An approach to incremental SVM 
learning algorithm,” in Tools with Artificial Intelligence, 2000. ICTAI 
2000. Proceedings. 12th IEEE International Conference on, 2000, 
pp. 268–273. 
 
 
 
 